---
title: 'CS 1110 - Overview'
date: '2021-09-02'
---

# CS 1110
## _Intro to Computing using Python_



## Class Overview

**CS 1110: Introduction to Computing using Python** (fall, spring, summer). 4 credits.
Assumes basic high school mathematics (no calculus) but no programming experience.

Introduces programming and problem-solving using Python. Emphasizes principles of software development, style, and testing. Topics include an operational model of Python execution, procedures and functions, iteration, recursion, lists, strings, algorithms, exceptions, object-oriented programming, and GUIs (graphical user interfaces). Weekly labs provide guided practice on the computer, with staff present to help. Assignments use graphics and GUIs to help develop fluency and understanding.

**Expected Outcomes**
- Fluency in the use of procedural statements — assignments, conditional statements, loops, function calls — and lists.
- Mastery in designing, coding, and testing small Python programs that meet requirements expressed in English.
- Competency in object-oriented programming as used in Python, including classes, subclasses, and inheritance.
- Knowledge of basic searching and sorting algorithms and the basics of vector computation.

### **Course objectives:**
The primary goal of CS1110 is to give students a basic introduction to object-oriented and procedural programming, using Python.
Topics covered:
* Primitive types and class types
* Functions (procedures, and fruitful functions), including recursion
* Basic statements: assignment, if-statements, loops, blocks, function calls
* Objects and classes, including subclasses, inheritance, and overriding
* Sequences and dictionaries
* Testing and debugging
* Program development; top-down design and object-oriented design
* Basic searching and sorting algorithms
* Generators and cooperative multitasking
* Model of python execution
* Programming style considerations

### **Class/laboratory schedule:**
* Two 50-minute lectures per week.
* Two 50-minute labs per week.

### **Contribution of course to meeting the professional component:**
This course contributes to item (a) of the professional component (one year of a combination of college level mathematics and basic sciences appropriate to the discipline) and to item (b) engineering design.

### **Course outcomes and their relation to ABET program outcomes a-k:**
1. Fluency in the use of procedural statements — assignments, conditional statements, loops, function
calls — and sequences. Be able to design, code, and test small Python programs that meet requirements expressed in English. This includes a basic understanding of top-down design. (a, b, c)
2. Understanding of the concepts of object-oriented programming as used in Python: classes, subclasses,
inheritance, and overriding. Understand the basics of OO design. (a, b, c, k)
3. Knowledge of basic searching and sorting algorithms, and the basics of vector computation. (k)
Assessment of course outcomes
Course outcomes will be assessed by examination (one midterm tests and one semi-final) as well as student-submitted homework and programming assignments. See the assessment details on the course website: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs1110/2020fa/assessment/

#### Person preparing this description and date:
Walker White, 17 August 2021; adapted from original by David Gries (27 December 2010)

### Ethical behavior statement:
We ask you not to cheat, in any way, shape, or form. In return, we will try our best to be fair about the amount of work we are giving you, in the grading of that work, and in giving you a course grade. You can always talk to us if you have any gripe or criticism about the course, and we will attempt to respond to it
immediately.
Some forms of cheating are pretty straightforward. Others are less so. Every year, we find several academic integrity violations. In many of these cases, the students were not necessarily intending to cheat.
CS 1110 has a very detailed policy on academic integrity. You should refer to the current web page for
more information on this policy.
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs1110/2021fa/assessment/integrity/
